# Project_Scripting_for_Biologists
# Title: Identification of novel SNPs associated with breast cancer using WGS data
## Introduction: 
Breast cancer is a complex and heterogeneous disease with diverse genetic alterations contributing to its development and progression. With advancements in high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies, whole genome sequencing (WGS) has emerged as a powerful tool for identifying genetic variants associated with breast cancer. WGS allows for a comprehensive and unbiased assessment of the entire genome, providing detailed insights into the genomic landscape of breast cancer.

In this project, I utilized WGS data to identify genetic variants in breast cancer samples using Genomic Analysis Tool Kit (GATK) best practices. Variant calling is a critical step in the analysis of WGS data, where the goal is to identify DNA sequence changes, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and small insertions/deletions (indels), that may underlie breast cancer pathogenesis. By applying haplotype caller to breast cancer WGS data, I aimed to comprehensively characterize the spectrum of genetic variants in the genome, which may contribute to our understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying breast cancer development and progression.

## Bioinformatics Processing of the Data: 
### 1. FastQC:
FastQC (Fast Quality Control) is a widely used software tool for assessing the quality of whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. WGS data can be prone to various errors and biases that can affect the accuracy and reliability of downstream analyses. FastQC is designed to provide a quick and comprehensive overview of the quality of WGS data, allowing researchers to identify potential issues and make informed decisions regarding data processing and analysis. It is done before and after the trimming of the raw fastq read data.

Script:

#!/bin/sh

########This line changes the current directory to /home/scripting_project/, which is the directory where the FastQC analysis will be performed#######

cd /home/scripting_project/

########This line loads the FastQC module in the computing cluster, which makes the FastQC software available for use in the script##########

module load fastqc

########This line starts a for loop that iterates over all the files in the current directory that have the file extension _1.fastq.gz. The QUALITY variable will hold the name of each file in each iteration of the loop.########

for QUALITY in *_1.fastq.gz
do

########This line runs the FastQC command on the current file specified by the QUALITY variable######

fastqc $QUALITY

done

### 2. Trimming:
Trimming is an essential step in the quality control process of Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data analysis. Trimmomatic is a command-line tool that provides a comprehensive suite of trimming options, allowing users to customize trimming parameters based on the specific characteristics of their WGS data. It employs various algorithms, including sliding window approach and quality-based trimming, to identify and remove low-quality regions from sequencing reads, resulting in improved data quality and increased accuracy in downstream analyses. It helps to remove the sequencing adapters.

Script:

#!/bin/sh

cd /home/scripting_project/

module load trimmomatic/0.39

#######List all files ending with _1.fastq.gz in the current directory and save the list in a file called SampleList.txt######

ls *_1.fastq.gz > Trim_SampleList.txt

######Read the contents of SampleList.txt and store it in the variable LIST#######

LIST=`cat Trim_SampleList.txt`
for FILE in $LIST
do

#######Extract the filename without the extension and store it in the variable NAME using awk. It should be changed based on the sample name######

NAME=`echo $FILE | awk -F "." '{print $1}'`

########Run the Trimmomatic tool with specified parameters on the current file########

java -jar /tools/trimmomatic-0.39/trimmomatic-0.39.jar PE -threads 48 -phred33 -trimlog $NAME.trim.log "$NAME"_1.fastq.gz "$NAME"_2.fastq.gz -baseout $NAME.trim.fastq.gz ILLUMINACLIP:TruSeq3-PE.fa:2:30:10 HEADCROP:0 LEADING:0 TRAILING:0 SLIDINGWINDOW:4:10

done

### 3. Mapping:
BWA-MEM (Burrows-Wheeler Aligner - Maximal Exact Match) is a popular and widely used software tool for aligning DNA sequencing reads to reference genomes. In my study, I aligned the raw quality controlled fastq read files to the hg38 (Human Genome version 38) reference genome. BWA-MEM is specifically designed to handle the challenges of aligning high-throughput sequencing data generated by next-generation sequencing technologies, such as Illumina, to large and complex genomes like the human genome.

Script:

#!/bin/sh
cd /home/scripting_project/
module load bwa
module load samtools

#######Read the contents of SampleList.txt and store it in the variable LIST########

LIST=`cat BWA_SamplesList.txt
for FILE in $LIST; do

######Extract the filename without the extension and store it in the variable NAME using awk######

NAME=`echo $FILE | awk -F "." '{print $1}'`

#######This decompresses gzip-compressed fastq files#######

gzip -d "$NAME".trim_1P.fastq.gz "$NAME".trim_2P.fastq.gz

#######This performs sequence alignment using bwa mem command with the -t option set to 48 (indicating the number of threads to use), and the -M option (which marks shorter split hits as secondary)##########   
      
bwa mem -t 48 -M /hosted/cvmpt/archive/Human_Genome/genome "$NAME".trim_1P.fastq \
"$NAME".trim_2P.fastq > "$NAME".mem.sam

#######This converts the SAM file to a binary BAM file using samtools view command with the -Sb options, and the -@ option set to 48 (indicating the number of threads to use).########

samtools view -Sb -@ 48 "$NAME".mem.sam -o "$NAME".mem.bam

########This sorts the BAM file by coordinates using samtools sort command#######

samtools sort -@ 48 "$NAME".mem.bam -o "$NAME".memsorted.bam

########This creates an index for the sorted BAM file using samtools index command#######
samtools index -@ 48 "$NAME".memsorted.bam

gzip "$NAME".trim_1P.fastq "$NAME".trim_2P.fastq

done

### 4. Add Read Group:
One crucial step is the addition or replacement of read group information, which provides essential metadata associated with each read. This information includes details such as sample identification, sequencing platform, library preparation method, and sequencing center, and is critical for downstream analyses, such as variant calling and genotyping.

Script:

#!/bin/sh

module load samtools
module load gatk
module load picard

####Read the contents of RG_SampleList.txt and store it in the variable LIST#####

LIST=`cat RG_SamplesList.txt

for FILE in $LIST; do

########Extract the filename without the extension and store it in the variable NAME using awk########

NAME=`echo $FILE | awk -F "." '{print $1}'`

######The following line runs the Java executable and executes the Picard tool AddOrReplaceReadGroups using its JAR file#######

java -jar /tools/picard-2.23.9/libs/picard.jar AddOrReplaceReadGroups \
       I="$NAME".memsorted.bam \
       O="$NAME".rg.bam \
       RGID="$NAME" \
       RGLB=lib1 \
       RGPL=ILLUMINA \
       RGPU=unit1 \
       RGSM="$NAME"_WGS1
 
########This sorts the BAM file by coordinates using samtools sort command########

samtools sort -@ 48 "$NAME".rg.bam -o "$NAME".rgsorted.bam

#########This creates an index for the sorted BAM file using samtools index command########

samtools index -@ 48 "$NAME".rgsorted.bam

done

### 5. Marking Duplicate Reads:
This step is used to identify and remove duplicate reads that arise during the sequencing process. Duplicate reads can occur due to various factors such as amplification bias during library preparation, PCR amplification artifacts, and optical duplicates caused by clustered sequencing of the same DNA fragments. These duplicates can lead to biased results, inaccurate variant calling, and inflated coverage metrics.

Script:

#!/bin/sh

module load picard
module load samtools

####Read the contents of MD_SampleList.txt and store it in the variable LIST#####

LIST=`cat MD_SamplesList.txt
for FILE in $LIST; do

########Extract the filename without the extension and store it in the variable NAME using awk#######

NAME=`echo $FILE | awk -F "." '{print $1}'`

#########The following line runs the Java executable and executes the Picard tool MarkDuplicates using its JAR file########

java -jar /tools/picard-2.23.9/libs/picard.jar MarkDuplicates \
      I="$NAME".rgsorted.bam \
      O="$NAME".markdup.bam \
      M="$NAME".marked_dup_metrics.txt

samtools sort -@ 48 "$NAME".markdup.bam -o "$NAME".markdup.sorted.bam
samtools index -@ 48 "$NAME".markdup.sorted.bam

done

### 6. Variant Calling:
Haplotype caller is the most widely used approach for variant calling , which is a part of the Genome Analysis Toolkit (GATK) developed by the Broad Institute. The haplotype caller is designed to accurately detect single nucleotide variants (SNVs), insertions, deletions, and complex variations in DNA sequences, making it a powerful tool for identifying genetic mutations, polymorphisms, and other genomic variations. The haplotype caller employs a probabilistic model to analyze WGS data, taking into account the unique characteristics of the data, such as base quality scores, read mapping quality, and local sequence context.

Script:

#!/bin/sh

module load gatk 

########Read the contents of Hap_SampleList.txt and store it in the variable LIST#########

LIST=`cat Hap_SamplesList.txt
for FILE in $LIST; do

#########Extract the filename without the extension and store it in the variable NAME using awk#########

NAME=`echo $FILE | awk -F "." '{print $1}'`

#########Runs GATK HaplotypeCaller##########

gatk --java-options "-Xmx80g" HaplotypeCaller  \

#########Reference genome path##########   
-R /hosted/cvmpt/archive/Human_Genome/genome.fa \
   -I "$NAME".markdup.sorted.bam \
   -O "$NAME".g.vcf.gz \
   -ERC GVCF \    #######Specifies the type of variant calls to be generated, which is gVCF (genomic VCF) in this case########
   -A AlleleFraction \
   -A BaseQuality \
   -A MappingQuality \
   --native-pair-hmm-threads 48 
 
done

## Results:



## Conclusion:
In conclusion, this study utilized whole genome sequencing data and GATK best practices to identify genetic variants in breast cancer samples, providing valuable insights into the genomic landscape of breast cancer. The findings contribute to the growing understanding of the genetic alterations that drive breast cancer development and progression.

## Limitations and Future Directions:
The identification of genetic variants in breast cancer has important implications for clinical practice and research. It may enable the development of targeted therapies, as well as help in identifying potential biomarkers for diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment response prediction. Due to the gigantic size of the human WGS data, it has taken a huge amount of time to complete each step of the bioinformatics processing of the data. Most of the time I got an “out of memory” error while processing the data. Due to these limitations, I could not go further than variant calling. In future, the identified SNPs could be annotated using ANNOVAR and filtered based on allele frequency, functional impact, and predicted pathogenicity. The filtered SNPs could be tested for association with breast cancer using a logistic regression model implemented in PLINK. SNPs could be validated by comparing them to publicly available databases such as dbSNP, which contains information on known SNPs. This method can help determine whether the SNP has been previously identified in other studies. Nevertheless, the findings provide a foundation for future research and contribute to the growing body of knowledge on breast cancer genomics. These findings have the potential to impact breast cancer diagnosis, treatment, and personalized medicine approaches. Further research in this area may lead to improved therapeutic strategies and better patient outcomes in breast cancer management.
